What is the Main Problem?
When you build software projects, you need to store data permanently. For example, if you make a library management system, you need to save information about books even after closing the program. Otherwise, when your program ends, all data in variables disappears.
Solution 1: File Handling
You can save data in files on your hard disk. But this approach has problems:

Complex coding - You need to write lots of extra code just to manage files
High risk of errors - Easy to make mistakes
Hard to maintain relationships - If you delete a member who has borrowed a book, you need to check multiple files and update them properly

Solution 2: Database Management System (DBMS)
Instead of writing all that complex file-handling code yourself, use ready-made software like MySQL that does this job for you!
What is a Database?
A collection of files where you store all your business data.
What is DBMS?
Software that manages your database - handles all the file operations, security, updates, and deletions for you.
Why Use MySQL?
Benefits:

Saves development time
Reduces errors
Less testing needed
Handles complex operations automatically
Even if it costs money, it's worth it because it's the most difficult part of the project

How Does It Work?
Instead of working directly with files, you:

Send commands to MySQL using SQL language (Structured Query Language)
MySQL manages everything in the background
You think of data as tables (rows and columns), not files

Understanding Tables
Think of a table like an Excel spreadsheet:

Columns = types of information (like Roll Number, Name, Email)
Rows = individual records (each student)
Field = one piece of data
Record = complete row of information

Table Relationships
Tables can be connected! For example:

Students table has student info
Batch table has course info
They connect using Roll Number (Primary Key)
This prevents data duplication and keeps everything consistent

Getting Started with MySQL
Installation steps:

Search "how to install MySQL"
Download from official MySQL website
Follow setup wizard (click next, next...)

Basic Commands:
mysql -u root -p          // Login to MySQL
show databases;           // See all databases
use db1;                  // Select a database
show tables;              // See tables in database
describe book;            // See structure of 'book' table
status;                   // Check connection details